docs: rewrite the MCP Inspector documentation for v2 (#3143)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/docs/2026-07-28/tools/inspector/protocol-eras.mdx

---
title: Protocol eras
description: How the Inspector negotiates legacy vs. modern MCP, and how every feature is handled between protocol eras
---

> The 2026-07-28 revision of MCP changed enough of the wire protocol that a debugging tool cannot pretend the difference away. The Inspector therefore treats **protocol era** as a first-class, per-server setting, orthogonal to the transport: the same HTTP URL can be inspected as a legacy server or as a modern one, and several tabs render meaningfully different UI and traffic depending on which.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The 2026-07-28 revision of MCP made substantial changes to the protocol. The Inspector therefore treats **protocol era** as a first-class, per-server setting, orthogonal to the transport: the same HTTP URL can be inspected as a legacy server or as a modern one. Several tabs render meaningfully different UI and traffic depending on which.
```

Author: Applied in a8e08fe4.

## The `Protocol Era` setting

Each server carries a `protocolEra` of `legacy`, `auto`, or `modern`. In the web client it lives in **Server Settings**; in a catalog or config file it is the `protocolEra` field; in the CLI and TUI it comes from that same file.

| Era      | What the Inspector does at connect                                                      |
| -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `legacy` | **The default.** Plain `initialize`, no probing at all.                                 |
| `auto`   | Probe `server/discover` first, and fall back to `initialize` on any non-modern outcome. |
| `modern` | Pin exactly `2026-07-28`. No fallback — a non-modern server fails loudly.               |

<Note>
  **Why `legacy` is the default, and not `auto`.** A debugging tool must not
  auto-probe. A `server/discover` probe stalls against silent legacy stdio
  servers, and it pollutes the recorded transcript you came here to read. Opting
  into `auto` or `modern` is a deliberate act, so what you see in the Protocol
  tab is what your server would have seen from a client behaving the way you
  configured.
</Note>

> Version negotiation happens entirely **client-side**. When the web client is used, the Node backend simply pumps JSON-RPC bytes; the `server/discover` probe and the per-request `_meta` envelope travel as ordinary message bodies. Nothing about era selection depends on which of the three clients you use.

Reviewer: I don't think I understand this sentence. This feels like an implementation detail rather than soemthing useful to users.

Author: Fair — that paragraph was describing how the web client's Node backend proxies bytes, which nobody reading this needs. Cut in a8e08fe4 and replaced with the only part that affects the reader:

> Era selection works the same way in all three clients — the same setting, the same negotiation, the same result.

Reproduce with `test-servers/configs/xmcpheader-modern-http.json`.

<Warning>
  **`Mcp-Param-*` mirroring is skipped by the SDK in the browser.** Calling a
  mirrored tool from the *web* client omits the header, so a strict server
  answers `-32020`. The same tool called from the **CLI** or **TUI** — both Node
  — mirrors correctly. This is an SDK environment check, not an Inspector
  limitation.
</Warning>

<Frame caption="get_weather shows its mirrored city → Mcp-Param-City header, while invalid_header_tool is struck through under the Excluded (SEP-2243) divider.">
  <img src="/images/inspector/tools-sep2243.png" />
</Frame>

### The new `-32602` error panels

Under the modern era a `tools/call` that rejects with `-32602` renders as a distinct **error panel** rather than an `isError` result:

- **Unknown Tool** — when the message names a missing tool. Reproduce by calling a tool the server dropped from its list.

> - **Invalid Parameters** — any other `-32602`. Reproduce with the `trigger_invalid_params` tool in the config above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `-32602` error panels

Under the modern era a `tools/call` that rejects with `-32602` renders as a distinct **error panel**:

- **Unknown Tool** — when the message names a missing tool. Reproduce by calling a tool the server dropped from its list.
- **Invalid Parameters** — any other `-32602`. Reproduce with the `trigger_invalid_params` tool in the config above.
```

Lets mention what it does, in relation to old behaviour. Most users won't be familiar with the difference and in those cases it becomes more confusing than helpful.

Author: Took the suggestion and added a paragraph on the legacy comparison in a8e08fe4.

Worth flagging that the original text was also wrong on the substance: `isError` vs. a JSON-RPC error is not an era difference — both the 2025-11-25 and 2026-07-28 specs return protocol errors like unknown-tool as JSON-RPC errors and reserve `isError` for tool execution failures. The actual difference is only in how the Inspector renders it, so that is what the new paragraph says:

> Both eras reject with `-32602`; what changes is how the Inspector presents it. On a legacy connection you get one generic JSON-RPC failure and have to read the message to tell which case you hit. On a modern connection the Inspector classifies it first, so "the server doesn't have that tool" is visually distinct from "your arguments were wrong."
